Come on, come on, come on; give me your hand, sir;
your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by the rood! And how doth
good cousin Silence?
And how doth my cousin, your bed-fellow? and your
daughter and mine, my god-daughter Ellen?
By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin William is
a good scholar; he is at Oxford still, is he not?
'A must, then, to the Inns o' Court shortly. I was
Clement's Inn; where I think they will talk of mad Shallow
By the mass, I was call'd anything; and I would have
anything indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little
John Doit of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and
Pickbone, and Will Squele a Cotsole man—you had not four
swinge-bucklers in all the Inns of Court again. And I may say
you we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the best of
all at commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir John,
and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
The same Sir John, the very same. I see him break
Scoggin's head at the court gate, when 'a was a crack not
high; and the very same day did I fight with one Sampson
Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the
days that I have spent! and to see how many of my old
acquaintance are dead!
Certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure. Death, as
Psalmist saith, is certain to all; all shall die. How a good
of bullocks at Stamford fair?
Death is certain. Is old Double of your town living
Jesu, Jesu, dead! drew a good bow; and dead! 'A shot a
fine shoot. John a Gaunt loved him well, and betted much
his head. Dead! 'A would have clapp'd i' th' clout at twelve
score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and
and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to
How a score of ewes now?
And is old Double dead?
Good morrow, honest gentlemen.
I am Robert Shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this
and one of the King's justices of the peace. What is your
pleasure with me?
He greets me well, sir; I knew him a good back-sword
How doth the good knight? May I ask how my lady his wife
It is well said, in faith, sir; and it is well said
too. 'Better accommodated!' It is good; yea, indeed, is it.
phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable.
'Accommodated!' It comes of accommodo. Very good; a good
It is very just. Look, here comes good Sir John. Give
your good hand, give me your worship's good hand. By my
you like well and bear your years very well. Welcome, good
John.
No, Sir John; it is my cousin Silence, in commission with me.
Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?
Where's the roll? Where's the roll? Where's the roll?
me see, let me see, let me see. So, so, so, so,—so, so—yea,
marry, sir. Rafe Mouldy! Let them appear as I call; let them
so, let them do so. Let me see; where is Mouldy?
What think you, Sir John? A good-limb'd fellow; young,
strong, and of good friends.
Ha, ha, ha! most excellent, i' faith! Things that are
mouldy lack use. Very singular good! In faith, well said, Sir
John; very well said.
Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside; know you where you
For th' other, Sir John—let me see. Simon Shadow!
Where's Shadow?
Do you like him, Sir John?
Thomas Wart!
Shall I prick him, Sir John?
Ha, ha, ha! You can do it, sir; you can do it. I
you well. Francis Feeble!
Shall I prick him, sir?
Peter Bullcalf o' th' green!
Here is two more call'd than your number. You must
but four here, sir; and so, I pray you, go in with me to
O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in
windmill in Saint George's Field?
Ha, 'twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork alive?
She never could away with me.
By the mass, I could anger her to th' heart. She was
a bona-roba. Doth she hold her own well?
Nay, she must be old; she cannot choose but be old;
certain she's old; and had Robin Nightwork, by old Nightwork,
before I came to Clement's Inn.
Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that
knight and I have seen! Ha, Sir John, said I well?
That we have, that we have, that we have; in faith,
John, we have. Our watchword was 'Hem, boys!' Come, let's to
dinner; come, let's to dinner. Jesus, the days that we have
Come, come.
Four of which you please.
Come, Sir John, which four will you have?
Marry, then—Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow.
Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong. They are
likeliest men, and I would have you serv'd with the best.
He is not his craft's master, he doth not do it right.
remember at Mile-end Green, when I lay at Clement's Inn—I
then Sir Dagonet in Arthur's show—there was a little quiver
fellow, and 'a would manage you his piece thus; and 'a would
about and about, and come you in and come you in. 'Rah, tah,
tah!' would 'a say; 'Bounce!' would 'a say; and away again
'a go, and again would 'a come. I shall ne'er see such a
Sir John, the Lord bless you; God prosper your
God send us peace! At your return, visit our house; let our
acquaintance be renewed. Peradventure I will with ye to the
court.
Go to; I have spoke at a word. God keep you.
By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to-night.
What, Davy, I say!
I will not excuse you; you shall not be excus'd;
shall not be admitted; there is no excuse shall serve; you
not be excus'd. Why, Davy!
Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy; let me see, Davy; let me see,
Davy; let me see—yea, marry, William cook, bid him come
Sir John, you shall not be excus'd.
With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook—are there
young pigeons?
Let it be cast, and paid. Sir John, you shall not be
excused.
'A shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a couple of
short-legg'd hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little
kickshaws, tell William cook.
Yea, Davy; I will use him well. A friend i' th' court
better than a penny in purse. Use his men well, Davy; for
are arrant knaves and will backbite.
Well conceited, Davy—about thy business, Davy.
There, is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor.
Visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.
Go to; I say he shall have no wrong. Look about,
I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master Bardolph.
And welcome, my tall fellow. Come, Sir John.
Sir John!
Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour, we
will eat a last year's pippin of mine own graffing, with a
of caraways, and so forth. Come, cousin Silence. And then to
Barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all, Sir
-marry, good air. Spread, Davy, spread, Davy; well said,
A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir
John. By the mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper. A
varlet. Now sit down, now sit down; come, cousin.
Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.
Be merry, Master Bardolph; and, my little soldier
be merry.
Davy!
Honest Bardolph, welcome; if thou want'st anything and
wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. Welcome, my little tiny
and welcome indeed too. I'll drink to Master Bardolph, and to
the cabileros about London.
By the mass, you'll crack a quart together—ha! will
not, Master Bardolph?
By God's liggens, I thank thee. The knave will stick
thee, I can assure thee that. 'A will not out, 'a; 'tis true
bred.
Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing; be merry.
Look who's at door there, ho! Who
Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.
Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with news from
court, I take it there's but two ways—either to utter them
conceal them. I am, sir, under the King, in some authority.
Under King Harry.
Harry the Fourth.
It doth so.
It doth so.
It doth, it doth, it doth.
It is best, certain.
'Tis so, indeed.
Yea, marry, Sir John; which I beseech you to let me
home with me.
I cannot perceive how, unless you give me your
and stuff me out with straw. I beseech you, good Sir John,
have five hundred of my thousand.
A colour that I fear you will die in, Sir John.