Master Fang, have you ent'red the action?
Where's your yeoman? Is't a lusty yeoman? Will 'a
to't?
O Lord, ay! good Master Snare.
Yea, good Master Snare; I have ent'red him and all.
Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabb'd me in mine
house, and that most beastly. In good faith, 'a cares not
mischief he does, if his weapon be out; he will foin like any
devil; he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
No, nor I neither; I'll be at your elbow.
I am undone by his going; I warrant you, he's an
infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master Fang, hold him
Good Master Snare, let him not scape. 'A comes continuantly
Pie-corner—saving your manhoods—to buy a saddle; and he is
indited to dinner to the Lubber's Head in Lumbert Street, to
Master Smooth's the silkman. I pray you, since my exion is
ent'red, and my case so openly known to the world, let him be
brought in to his answer. A hundred mark is a long one for a
lone woman to bear; and I have borne, and borne, and borne;
have been fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, and fubb'd off, from
day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. There
honesty in such dealing; unless a woman should be made an ass
a beast, to bear every knave's wrong.
Yonder he comes; and that arrant malmsey-nose knave,
with him. Do your offices, do your offices, Master Fang and
Master Snare; do me, do me, do me your offices.
Throw me in the channel! I'll throw thee in the
Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue! Murder, murder!
thou honeysuckle villain! wilt thou kill God's officers and
King's? Ah, thou honey-seed rogue! thou art a honey-seed; a
man-queller and a woman-queller.
Good people, bring a rescue or two. Thou wot, wot
thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou rogue! do, thou hemp-seed!
Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you, stand to
O My most worshipful lord, an't please your Grace, I
poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.
It is more than for some, my lord; it is for all—all
have. He hath eaten me out of house and home; he hath put all
substance into that fat belly of his. But I will have some of
out again, or I will ride thee a nights like a mare.
Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the
too. Thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet,
my Dolphin chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire,
Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thy head for
liking his father to singing-man of Windsor—thou didst swear
me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me
lady thy wife. Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife Keech,
butcher's wife, come in then and call me gossip Quickly?
in to borrow a mess of vinegar, telling us she had a good
prawns, whereby thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told
thee they were ill for green wound? And didst thou not, when
was gone down stairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity
such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me
And didst thou not kiss me, and bid me fetch the thirty
shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it, if thou
canst.
Yea, in truth, my lord.
Faith, you said so before.
By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be fain to
both my plate and the tapestry of my dining-chambers.
Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles;
i' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God save me, la!
Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown.
I hope you'll come to supper. you'll pay me all together?
Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?
I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an
good temperality. Your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as
would desire; and your colour, I warrant you, is as red as
rose, in good truth, la! But, i' faith, you have drunk too
canaries; and that's a marvellous searching wine, and it
the blood ere one can say 'What's this?' How do you now?
Why, that's well said; a good heart's worth gold.
Lo, here comes Sir John.
Sick of a calm; yea, good faith.
By my troth, this is the old fashion; you two never
but you fall to some discord. You are both, i' good truth, as
rheumatic as two dry toasts; you cannot one bear with
confirmities. What the good-year! one must bear, and that
you. You are the weaker vessel, as as they say, the emptier
vessel.
If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by my faith!
must live among my neighbours; I'll no swaggerers. I am in
name and fame with the very best. Shut the door. There comes
swaggerers here; I have not liv'd all this while to have
swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.
Pray ye, pacify yourself, Sir John; there comes no
swaggerers here.
Tilly-fally, Sir John, ne'er tell me; and your ancient
swagg'rer comes not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick,
debuty, t' other day; and, as he said to me—'twas no longer
than Wednesday last, i' good faith!—'Neighbour Quickly,'
he—Master Dumbe, our minister, was by then—'Neighbour
says he 'receive those that are civil, for' said he 'you are
an ill name.' Now 'a said so, I can tell whereupon. 'For'
'you are an honest woman and well thought on, therefore take
what guests you receive. Receive' says he 'no swaggering
companions.' There comes none here. You would bless you to
what he said. No, I'll no swagg'rers.
Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest man my
nor no cheater; but I do not love swaggering, by my troth. I
the worse when one says 'swagger.' Feel, masters, how I
look you, I warrant you.
Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an aspen
cannot abide swagg'rers.
Come, I'll drink no proofs nor no bullets. I'll drink
more than will do me good, for no man's pleasure, I.
No, good Captain Pistol; not here, sweet captain.
Good Captain Peesel, be quiet; 'tis very late, i'
beseek you now, aggravate your choler.
By my troth, Captain, these are very bitter words.
O' my word, Captain, there's none such here. What the
good-year! do you think I would deny her? For God's sake, be
quiet.
Here's goodly stuff toward!
Here's a goodly tumult! I'll forswear keeping house
I'll be in these tirrits and frights. So; murder, I warrant
Alas, alas! put up your naked weapons, put up your naked
Are you not hurt i' th' groin? Methought 'a made a
thrust at your belly.
O, the Lord preserve thy Grace! By my troth, welcome
London. Now the Lord bless that sweet face of thine. O Jesu, are you come from Wales?
God's blessing of your good heart! and so she is, by
troth.
No, I warrant you.
All vict'lers do so. What's a joint of mutton or two
whole Lent?
Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door there,
Francis.
Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these
years, come peascod-time; but an honester and truer-hearted
What's the matter?
O, run Doll, run, run, good Come. [To BARDOLPH] She
comes blubber'd.—Yea, will you come, Doll? Exeunt
No, thou arrant knave; I would to God that I might die,
that I might have thee hang'd. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of
joint.
O the Lord, that Sir John were come! He would make this a
bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb
miscarry!
O God, that right should thus overcome might!
Well, of sufferance comes ease.
Ay, come, you starv'd bloodhound.
Thou atomy, thou!