CORIOLANUS, 'tis true that you have lately told us;
The Volsces are in arms.
Then, worthy CORIOLANUS,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,
Our greatest friends attend us.
Hence to your homes; be gone!
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.
Our army's in the field
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.
Farewell.
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
That's lesser than a little.
Hark! our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls,
Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes;
They'll open of themselves.
Hark you. far off!
There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out.
Masters o' the people,
We do request your kindest ears, and after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.
Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.
Call Coriolanus.
Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
No more words, we beseech you.
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.
Pray you, let's to him.
There's no remedy;
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst, and perish.
Amen, amen.
Stay: whence are you?
From whence?
You may not pass, you must return: our general
Will no more hear from thence.
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name
Is not here passable.
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.
You are a Roman, are you?
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
when you have pushed out your gates the very
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with
the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived;
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
you out of reprieve and pardon.
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest
I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,—that's
the utmost of your having: back.
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
greatness back?
A noble fellow, I warrant him.
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them:
Unshout the noise that banish'd CORIOLANUS,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'