He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell
you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.
As the event stamps them: but they have a good
cover; they show well outward. The prince and Count
Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine
orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine:
the prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my
niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it
this night in a dance: and if he found her
accordant, he meant to take the present time by the
top and instantly break with you of it.
A good sharp fellow: I will send for him; and
question him yourself.
I saw him not.
In faith, she's too curst.
Well, niece, I trust you will be ruled
by your father.
At a word, I am not.
To tell you true, I counterfeit him.
At a word, I am not.
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself:
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself;
Make those that do offend you suffer too.
Here comes the prince and Claudio hastily.
If he could right himself with quarreling,
Some of us would lie low.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed:
But that's no matter; let him kill one first;
Win me and wear me; let him answer me.
Come, follow me, boy; come, sir boy, come, follow me:
Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence;
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece;
And she is dead, slander'd to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue:
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milksops!
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,—
Scrambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
And this is all.
Come, 'tis no matter:
Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
Farewell, my lords: we look for you to-morrow.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
Which I will do with confirm'd countenance.
This same is she, and I do give you her.