Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass, to know where sits the wind,
Peering in maps for ports and piers and roads;
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.
Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
Gratiano and Lorenzo. Fare ye well:
We leave you now with better company.
'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly order'd,
And better in my mind not undertook.
Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.
And so will I.
The villain Jew with outcries raised the duke,
Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.
I never heard a passion so confused,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets:
'My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter!
Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
Justice! the law! my ducats, and my daughter!
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter!
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stolen by my daughter! Justice! find the girl;
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.'
Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
Or he shall pay for this.
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear;
Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
I think he only loves the world for him.
I pray thee, let us go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.
Now, what news on the Rialto?
I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever
knapped ginger or made her neighbours believe she
wept for the death of a third husband. But it is
true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the
plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the
honest Antonio,—O that I had a title good enough
to keep his name company!—
Ha! what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath
lost a ship.
Let me say 'amen' betimes, lest the devil cross my
prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.
How now, Shylock! what news among the merchants?
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was
fledged; and then it is the complexion of them all
to leave the dam.
That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.
Out upon it, old carrion! rebels it at these years?
Here comes another of the tribe: a third cannot be
matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew.