Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.
Nay, I'll ne'er believe that; I have to show to the contrary.
Well, I do then; yet I say I could show you to the
contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel!
O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I
could come to such honour!
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,
I could be knighted.
We burn daylight: here, read, read; perceive how I
might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
men, as long as I have an eye to make difference of
men's liking: and yet he would not swear; praised
women's modesty; and gave such orderly and
well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness, that I
would have sworn his disposition would have gone to
the truth of his words; but they do no more adhere
and keep place together than the Hundredth Psalm to
the tune of 'Green Sleeves.' What tempest, I trow,
threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his
belly, ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged
on him? I think the best way were to entertain him
with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted
him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?
Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the very
words. What doth he think of us?
'Boarding,' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him
above deck.
Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him,
that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O,
that my husband saw this letter! it would give
eternal food to his jealousy.
You are the happier woman.
How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy?
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,
will you go, Mistress Page?
Trust me, I thought on her:
she'll fit it.
What, John! What, Robert!
I warrant. What, Robin, I say!
Here, set it down.
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
ready here hard by in the brew-house: and when I
suddenly call you, come forth, and without any pause
or staggering take this basket on your shoulders:
that done, trudge with it in all haste, and carry
it among the whitsters in Datchet-mead, and there
empty it in the muddy ditch close by the Thames side.
I ha' told them over and over; they lack no
direction. Be gone, and come when you are called.
How now, my eyas-musket! what news with you?
Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
Go to, then: we'll use this unwholesome humidity,
this gross watery pumpion; we'll teach him to know
turtles from jays.
O sweet Sir John!
I your lady, Sir John! alas, I should be a pitiful lady!
A plain kerchief, Sir John: my brows become nothing
else; nor that well neither.
Believe me, there is no such thing in me.
Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love Mistress Page.
Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you shall one
day find it.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could not
be in that mind.
Pray you, do so: she's a very tattling woman.
What's the matter? how now!
What's the matter, good Mistress Page?
What cause of suspicion?
Why, alas, what's the matter?
'Tis not so, I hope.
What shall I do? There is a gentleman my dear
friend; and I fear not mine own shame so much as his
peril: I had rather than a thousand pound he were
out of the house.
He's too big to go in there. What shall I do?
What, John! Robert! John!
Go take up these clothes here quickly. Where's the
cowl-staff? look, how you drumble! Carry them to
the laundress in Datchet-meat; quickly, come.
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You
were best meddle with buck-washing.
I know not which pleases me better, that my husband
is deceived, or Sir John.
I am half afraid he will have need of washing; so
throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of
Falstaff's being here; for I never saw him so gross
in his jealousy till now.
Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress
Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the
water; and give him another hope, to betray him to
another punishment?
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
He's a-birding, sweet Sir John.
Step into the chamber, Sir John.
Why, none but mine own people.
No, certainly.
Speak louder.
Why?
Why, does he talk of him?
How near is he, Mistress Page?
I am undone! The knight is here.
There they always use to discharge their
birding-pieces. Creep into the kiln-hole.
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,
coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an
abstract for the remembrance of such places, and
goes to them by his note: there is no hiding you in the house.
How might we disguise him?
My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a
gown above.
Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I will
look some linen for your head.
I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he
cannot abide the old woman of Brentford; he swears
she's a witch; forbade her my house and hath
threatened to beat her.
But is my husband coming?
We'll try that; for I'll appoint my men to carry the
basket again, to meet him at the door with it, as
they did last time.
I'll first direct my men what they shall do with the
basket. Go up; I'll bring linen for him straight.
Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders:
your master is hard at door; if he bid you set it
down, obey him: quickly, dispatch.
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in
any dishonesty.
Are you not ashamed? let the clothes alone.
Why, man, why?
If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's death.
What, ho, Mistress Page! come you and the old woman
down; my husband will come into the chamber.
Nay, it is my maid's aunt of Brentford.
Nay, good, sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let him
not strike the old woman.
Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit for you.
Nay, by the mass, that he did not; he beat him most
unpitifully, methought.
What think you? may we, with the warrant of
womanhood and the witness of a good conscience,
pursue him with any further revenge?
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?
I'll warrant they'll have him publicly shamed: and
methinks there would be no period to the jest,
should he not be publicly shamed.
Devise but how you'll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
Marry, this is our device;
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies, and the
Welsh devil Hugh?
That cannot choose but amaze him.
We'll betray him finely.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
Sir John! art thou there, my deer? my male deer?
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
Heaven forgive our sins
Away, away!
Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never meet.
I will never take you for my love again; but I will
always count you my deer.