Who's there?
I am glad to see your worships well.
I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
Sir, I thank you.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
It could not be judged, sir.
A cur, sir.
Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good
office between you.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
Here comes Sir John.
We three, to hear it and end it between them.
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
How now, Mistress Ford!
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
hot venison pasty to dinner: come, gentlemen, I hope
we shall drink down all unkindness.
Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! come, come.
Come on, sir.
'The humour of it,' quoth a'! here's a fellow
frights English out of his wits.
I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest
o' the town commended him for a true man.
How now, Meg!
How now, Master Ford!
Yes: and you heard what the other told me?
Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight would
offer it: but these that accuse him in his intent
towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded men;
very rogues, now they be out of service.
Marry, were they.
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and
what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it
lie on my head.
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes:
there is either liquor in his pate or money in his
purse when he looks so merrily.
How now, mine host!
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in
his rapier.
Have with you. I would rather hear them scold than fight.
Now, good master doctor!
Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great
fighter, though now a man of peace.
'Tis true, Master Shallow.
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
Adieu, good master doctor.
'Save you, good Sir Hugh!
And youthful still! in your doublet and hose this
raw rheumatic day!
We are come to you to do a good office, master parson.
Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike
having received wrong by some person, is at most
odds with his own gravity and patience that ever you
saw.
I think you know him; Master Doctor Caius, the
renowned French physician.
Why?
I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.
Nay, good master parson, keep in your weapon.
You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you:
but my wife, master doctor, is for you altogether.
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is
of no having: he kept company with the wild prince
and Poins; he is of too high a region; he knows too
much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes
with the finger of my substance: if he take her,
let him take her simply; the wealth I have waits on
my consent, and my consent goes not that way.
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.
Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his search.
Fie, fie, Master Ford! are you not ashamed? What
spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I
would not ha' your distemper in this kind for the
wealth of Windsor Castle.
Let's go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, we'll mock
him. I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house
to breakfast: after, we'll a-birding together; I
have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be so?
Now, Master Slender: love him, daughter Anne.
Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house:
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
She is no match for you.
No, good Master Fenton.
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to go
loose any longer; you must be pinioned.
This passes!
Here's no man.
No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.
Let's obey his humour a little further: come,
gentlemen.
And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
'Tis well, 'tis well; no more:
Be not as extreme in submission
As in offence.
But let our plot go forward: let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
How? to send him word they'll meet him in the park
at midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come.
So think I too.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak:
But what of this?
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come:
And in this shape when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? what is your plot?
That silk will I go buy.
And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
And marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight.
Come, come; we'll couch i' the castle-ditch till we
see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender,
my daughter.
The night is dark; light and spirits will become it
well. Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil
but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns.
Let's away; follow me.
Nay, do not fly; I think we have watch'd you now
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
Old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
And as poor as Job?
Yet be cheerful, knight: thou shalt eat a posset
to-night at my house; where I will desire thee to
laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee: tell her
Master Slender hath married her daughter.
Son, how now! how now, son! have you dispatched?
Of what, son?
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how
you should know my daughter by her garments?
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
How now, Master Fenton!
Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced.